Slash'EM Extended has all of SLASH'EM's races, as well as added ones not present in other variants. In this variant, every race (with very few exceptions) has maximum stats of 25 for every stat, and every combination of role, race, alignment and gender is possible. Starting with version v108 the player can also opt to play hybrid races: certain races can be added after the player has selected their base race, which means the player character will also experience some of the hybrid races' effects, but they usually either make the game more difficult or only have cosmetic effects. If a hybrid-eligible race has effects that are strictly beneficial to the player, they will only be in effect when that race is the player character's main race. Races in bold letters are eligible for hybridization. The new races are:

* Addict – Permanently confused, but this character race starts with maximized attributes. The lack of spellcasting ability makes playing the game very difficult, however the player's attacks will rarely miss and deal good amounts of damage, plus the Pw and Hp on leveling up are really high.
* '''Aggravator''' – All randomly spawned monsters are using aggravate monster rules, greatly increasing the maximum level they can have, meaning the player will encounter more dangerous monsters on average.
* ak Thief is dead! – Starts with uncurable and uncontrollable lycanthropy; their polymorph form's stats, intrinsics, speed, AC etc. are determined randomly at the start of the game (like shambling horrors). This makes playing this race a bit of a luck-based mission.
* Albae – Hated by all other races, many monsters that are normally peaceful will be hostile to the Albae. This includes quest friendlies and certain other "always peaceful" monsters. Shopkeepers won't attack them on sight but prevent them from entering. On the plus side, Albae start with magic resistance and will get some useful intrinsics from leveling up, topping off with the otherwise rare energy regeneration.
* Alchemist – A racial version of the scientist role, they start with a chemistry set, bottles and the chemistry spell, plus they know all types of potions from the beginning. Combined with some other good starting equipment and resistances, this makes them one of the easier races.
* Alien – Similar to human, but with worse stats, negative starting alignment record and luck and an annoying loadstone that's hard to get rid off. Basically a harder-than-hard race.
* '''American''' – All skills are restricted for them, which means they are a harder-than-hard race. However, when combined with the Gladiator role, they may learn random techniques on leveling up.
* '''Amnesiac''' – Permanent map amnesia, making this a difficult race since the player will constantly have their map erased. It's possible to "cheat" by frequently taking screenshots or, when playing on a public server, looking at one's own ttyrecs.
* Ancient – A more powerful human that starts with a random technique, but their items are renamed to gibberish.
* Ancipital – Unable to wear a helm, and also prevented from having fire resistance. Coming into contact with water has a greater than usual chance of rusting/blanking an ancipital's equipment. They have cold resistance and slow digestion, and are thick-skinned.
* Android – They can't eat corpses and neither pray nor sacrifice. However they have an additional 1d6 melee attack and resist death rays, plus they're unbreathing.
* '''Angbander''' – They get level feelings when entering a level for the first time. Negative level feelings cause more monsters and traps to be pre-placed, positive feelings will place random items on a level. Angbanders also start with extra scrolls of teleportation and identify, and those can be found more often too. However, angbanders are unable to have reflection, and breath attacks may instakill them if their HP isn't high enough.
* Angel – Starts with a vision range of 2 squares, as well as magic resistance, cold resistance, sleep resistance, shock resistance, poison resistance, flying, see invisible, and infravision; but all of their positive intrinsics are deactivated if their alignment record is negative. Angelic beings are usually peaceful to them.
* '''Aquarian''' – This amphibious race uses rusting attacks, and one of their quirks is that every dungeon level has rivers. Eels, flying fish and rust monsters are usually peaceful to them; other swimming or amphibious monsters also have a chance of being generated peaceful.
* Argonian – Can swim and is unbreathing, as well as use the healing hands technique. Lizards are usually peaceful to them.
* Asgardian – They get random intrinsics from leveling up, meaning they can get lucky and receive resistances, slow digestion or other good things early. However, Asgardians may also get unlucky and receive intrinsic hunger, polymorphitis or other bad things. Also, they have a 5% chance each turn to move at half speed. Still, they are a good choice for beginner players.
* Asura – Attacks faster while dual-wielding, but at the cost of movement speed. They have the dual-wielding skill even if the chosen role normally wouldn't. An asura player character gains less benefits from worn armor pieces if many of them are worn at once.
* Atlantean – Unable to ever have the riding skill. They have a 50% chance of evading a projectile or ray/breath fired at them, can swim, and their inventory is not subject to water damage.
* Aztpok – Unable to ever have the riding skill. They are fast and have a multishot bonus with firearms, plus their spirituality skill trains faster the higher it already is.
* Babylonian - Has double AC, gains alignment faster, starts with no skill slots and gains less slots from leveling up, gets large speed penalties when riding, turrets often spawn peaceful for them and can be displaced when they're peaceful, better chance of converting altars, can chat to peaceful turrets to turn them into symbiotes, gains less bonuses to casting chance from spellcasting skills and doesn't gain the big damage bonuses from weapon skills (just the regular, lower ones).
* Bacteria – Lacks limbs, but gains high amounts of HP and Pw from leveling up. A bacteria player that has less than 20% of their HP left will regenerate HP rapidly. They have increased chances of gaining intrinsics from eating corpses and can cast spells for slightly less mana as well as always overcast when out of mana. When coupled with a role that doesn't get the symbiosis skill, it will be unrestricted and capped at expert at game start.
* Bastard – Starts with additional equipment taken from a random role, which unrestricts the skills for additionally gained weapons/spellbooks/saddles, but none of their starting items start out fully identified.
* Batman – Starts with good intrinsics and big bonuses to throwing boomerangs, but is penalized for hitting intelligent monsters of the other gender. Bats are usually peaceful to them.
* '''Beacher''' – Identical to human, but also has the Practicant role's effect of having to obey certain rules, making this a difficult race. Failure to obey the rules results in having to pay some zorkmids to the quest nemesis.
* '''Blait''' – Identical to human, but the game display is permanently monochrome.
* Bodymorpher – Their stats will be reshuffled every once in a while, sometimes reducing the total amount of stat points allocated (resulting in a net loss).
* Borg – Racial jedi, capable of doing lightsaber action.
* '''Bossrusher''' – They encounter a random boss monster on every newly generated dungeon level.
* Bover – Always starts with at least a basic cap in riding. When riding, they can't have speed but will have half physical and spell damage and the steed will take less damage in combat. While not riding, wearing lithic armor pieces will slow them. Every once in a while a bover will get confused and cause nearby monsters to flee. They can swim in moorland unharmed, and being underwater causes them to regenerate HP more quickly. Bovers are resistant to poison and sickness and take longer to get hungry. A bover gains extra AC from lithic armor but an AC penalty from metallic armor.
* Breton – Good spellcaster, and starts with resistance to fire, cold and shock.
* Buldozgar – Bad at stealth, as monsters in their proximity will wake up randomly. They have to fight a lot since all monsters come straight for them, and out of depth monsters also spawn more often. On the bright side they have above-average stats and bonuses to their body armor skill.
* Burninator – They are permanently burned, which prevents natural HP and Pw regeneration completely. In order to survive, burninators need to use their "thirsty" melee attacks on monsters, which will restore some hit points and mana.
* Carthage – Moves slightly slower, and their speed when riding a steed is capped at 12. Riding a steed whose natural speed is lower than 12 reduces physical damage taken for both the player and their steed. The carthage can use an additional headbutt attack in melee while riding, and jousting with a lance has greatly reduced chances of shattering the lance. They always start with the lance and riding skills, but all skills except those two will train more slowly the higher they are.
* Celtic – Moves slightly faster (about 1% per experience level, so a level 30 celtic moves at 130% speed). They can tame golems by throwing metallic items, and golems also don't betray the player character but all non-golem pets can betray the player with a higher chance. Getting hurt can sometimes cause the celtic to go berserk.
* Centaur – They can tame any non-unique animal by throwing food at it. Also, centaurs gain increased success chances when using unicorn horns, but the horn also breaks more often for them, and centaurs only have half of the usual carry capacity and can't fit into narrow crevices. Centaurs are usually peaceful to them.
* Cerberus – Has no hands, but resists fire and can #monster to breathe fire, which costs a lot of Pw but shoots three bolts of fire in a single turn. Cerberus players don't fit through diagonal passages.
* '''Challenger''' – Monsters that spread perfume, try to convert the player or make wouwou taunts are much more common for them, as well as prostitutes, shoe monsters and farting monsters.
* Changeling – A race that gains permanent polymorphitis after 1000 turns. Obtaining polymorph control is important for them.
* Chiquai – If they lose alignment, they may be subjected to a random bad effect. Their items are highly resistant to erosion effects, and if something would convert them to another alignment, they have 80% chance of not being converted.
* Chiropteran – Does not fit into narrow crevices, but has greatly increased carry capacity.
* Clockwork automaton – They can attack thrice per turn, or throw two extra projectiles (including potions and other things that can't normally be multishot). They start with petrification resistance plus some other valuable intrinsics. However, clockwork automatons cannot eat at all. Potions of oil, Potions of booze, the Booze technique, polymorphing, and prayer are among the only ways for them to avoid starvation. The Polyform technique is learned at level 12, which allows them to polymorph uncontrollably.
* Cockatrice – Their active and passive stoning attacks make it easy to kill monsters, however they have a 50% risk of not being able to eat food and a separate 50% risk of bad effects when eating. Also, player characters of the cockatrice race move much slower than they normally would.
* Colorator – They get spell color nasty trap effects from leveling up. Depending on their actual experience level, a different such effect will be active, but only one at a given time.
* Cortex – A mix between the cockatrice and vortex races. With their stoning attacks, killing monsters is easy, but they're slow and lack eyes.
* Cupid – Their charisma is higher than normal and they have a chance of evading hostile missile weapon attacks and ray wands. Cupids always start with a ring of levitation and gain intrinsic flying at experience level 20.
* '''Curser''' – A harder-than-hard race, 80% of all items that would have been noncursed will be cursed for them. This includes monster starting inventories. The blessing technique can be used from time to time in order to lift curses (especially if the player's starting two-handed weapon started out cursed), but since most items are unsafe to use if cursed, they will still have a hard time.
* Dark seducer – They start with intrinsic magic resistance. However, their stats start out low and they have a hard time gaining max HP and Pw.
* Deathmold – Starts with uncurable and uncontrollable polymorphitis and the ability to #youpoly at will. Whenever they polymorph, they turn into one of about a dozen shambling horror type monsters with randomly generated stats, which may be very powerful early on but the polymorph forms may lack hands, limbs etc., making it harder to interact with the dungeon.
* Deep elf – Starts with fire and shock resistance, but unlike other elves, they are unable to gain sleep resistance.
* Destabilizer – Initialized to be a completely random monster, which affects what items the player may equip and also what their melee attacks are. The monster will be re-randomized every once in a while. There's no guarantee that the monster will be a good fighting form. They can never have polymorph control or unchanging.
* Developer – Has a seemingly easy start with supertelepathy and higher skill caps. They can also reach Basic in all the skills that their class doesn't get. However, special rooms can have out of depth monsters more often, traps are more common and more likely to be "evil" ones. After 5000 turns the monster respawn rate will speed up considerably, and after 10000 turns Rodney wakes up prematurely! And to top it off, developers are prevented from having speed (both intrinsic and extrinsic).
* Devil – Good starting intrinsics such as fire resistance, poison resistance, level drain resistance, infravison and the ability to tame demons make this a powerful race. Demons are usually peaceful to them.
* Dictionary attack - every once in a while, the game spawns 52 monsters on the current level, one for each letter of the alphabet (lowercase and uppercase).
* Dinosaur – High strength and HP growth from leveling up, but they are unable to wear most types of equipment.
* Dolgsman – Resistant to drain life and blindness, but gain little HP from leveling up, even when picking a role with good HP growth.
* Doppelganger – Monsters are randomly higher-level for them and have fewer death drops. They only have a limited amount of #youpoly uses, but are otherwise similar to vanilla.
* '''Dorian''' – They gain certain nasty trap effects intrinsically from leveling up, which get determined at game start. This makes them a challenging race.
* Dragon – Dragons are usually peaceful to them and can be tamed by throwing food, but dragon characters suffer from the lack of hands.
* Drow – Slightly more likely to encounter random traps, and monsters have fewer death drops. Their bare-handed sleep attack no longer always activates.
* Dryad – Teleportitis race.
* Dufflepud – Counts as dwarf (eating other dwarves is cannibalism), and they gain half the usual amount of HP/Pw from leveling up. While wearing boots, a dufflepud moves at half speed.
* Dunadan – A "superhuman" that starts with higher than usual stats, but they train stats and attributes more slowly and have a harder time accumulating spellcasting memory.
* Duthol – When riding a steed, they are capable of flying. Walking on sand speeds them up instead of slowing them down, and the chance of being affected by sandstorms is much lower. Wearing any footwear with block heels increases the duthol's AC by 5 points and grants 2 extra points of kicking damage. Monsters that would normally be peaceful have 50% chance of being spawned hostile instead. The duthol counts as thick-skinned, meaning that monsters with kick attacks will deal less damage to them.
* Dwarf – Mostly unchanged from vanilla.
* Dynamo – They're always being chased by the kops, even when they didn't rob a shop. For a dynamo, the monster difficulty is increased by 10 and boss monsters are much more common, their items sometimes teleport out of their inventory, they can't buy items in shops, and watchmen get hostile upon sighting them. However, they can sometimes absorb ranged weapon attacks (healing some HP in the process) and are completely immune to shock attacks, including their rings and wands being immune to destruction caused by shock damage.
* Egymid – More likely to successfully convert altars from other gods, and trains the spirituality skill twice as fast compared to other races.
* Elemental – This race starts with resistances to fire, cold and shock, plus elementals can instantly identify the + of a weapon by equipping it, so they can use the appraisal technique on wands or other non-weapon items instead. They can't get the invisibility or see invisible intrinsics though, and monsters will be generated with musable items more often for elementals.
* Elf – Mostly unchanged from vanilla.
* Engchip – Bigger range with bows and crossbows, but less accuracy. If they have a pet quadruped, that pet will deal 25% more damage to enemies in melee. Always starts with at least some knowledge of the petkeeping skill even when playing a role that would normally be restricted.
* Ent – Slow, but strong in melee due to extra attacks and AC.
* '''Erosator''' – All randomly generated items have various degrees of erosion on them if the player picks this race.
* Etherealoid – Has x-ray vision, flying, wallwalking and death resistance and is inediate. They don't regenerate HP naturally and don't fit through narrow passages. To regain HP, an etherealoid needs to kill a monster. Also, they're unable to wear armor unless polymorphed, but receive an AC bonus depending on their experience level. Etherealoids gain experience points at half the usual rate.
* '''Evilvariant''' – Implements some of the nastier evil patch ideas, including parts of the Wands Balance Patch, the elder priest, and a greatly increased chance of item destruction if the player is hit by elemental damage.
* Expert – Starts with psi resistance, but will encounter high-level monsters more often.
* '''Extravator''' – All randomly spawned monsters are using aggravate monster rules, like with the aggravator hybrid race, but with extra-high caps for the maximum level a monster can have.
* Fairy – Wearing any piece of equipment that weighs more than 15 units will slow them down considerably; this effect stacks proportional to the amount of heavy items equipped. This severely limits the gear that a fairy can use; heavy weapons and almost all types of body armor are out. However, fairies resist magic, drain life, shock, poison and acid and also have free action, flying and deafness. Their HP and Pw growths from leveling up are much lower than average. Fairies are resistant to sanity-increasing effects and have increased spellcasting success chances, however every equipped metallic item (including weapons and even rings and amulets) gives huge spellcasting penalties.
* Fawn – Unable to wear boots, but has increased devices skill.
* Felid – Has 9 lives, which basically means 8 slotless amulets of life saving, but lacks most body parts, making it awkward to play since they will have difficulty equipping weapons and armor, looting containers or doing other actions that would require hands. Losing a life will drain two experience levels.
* '''Feminizer''' – Has randomized feminism trap effects active that may shuffle when leveling up or also randomly over time.
* Fenek – Capable of using claw attacks when unarmed.
* Fiend – A vampiric race that can also drink blood from some monster types that don't actually have blood.
* Fixer – They randomly gain or lose intrinsics over time.
* Frendian – Gets the following nasty trap effects from leveling up: increased monster difficulty, dehydration, black ng walls, feeler gauges, autocursing equipment, discharging, hard mode and superscroller.
* Fro – Moves slightly slower, 2 extra points of AC, +5 to-hit when throwing an axe, +d10 damage with firearms, and always knows the axe and riding skills even when playing a role that normally doesn't have them.
* Gastly – Starts with many intrinsic resistances, but can only eat old corpses (no fruits, rations or other types of food).
* Gavil – They hunger rapidly and can't resist cold, plus cold attacks deal double damage to them and have increased chances of breaking potions. When attacking a monster in melee, the gavil may summon tame demons. Since they are demonic themselves, they are unable to pray unless chaotic.
* Gelatinous cube – Capable of eating organic items, and they start with a ton of resistances but lack eyes and limbs.
* Gerteut – Has an extra point of magic cancellation. All ranged weapons have +5 to-hit and +1 damage but are limited to a range of 5 squares, and they gain extra nutrition from eating food and take 20% less damage from monsters' melee attacks. If a gerteut uses the appraisal technique on a weapon that can be poisoned, the weapon in question will be poisoned, which means that the best alignment to use for a gerteut character is chaotic to avoid penalties.
* Giant – Can pick up and throw boulders. Hungers rapidly. Has infravision. They are also fire resistant at XL 10, cold resistant at XL 15, and shock resistant at XL 20. Giants are usually peaceful to them.
* Glorkum – A race that has a randomized base monster (basically a shambling horror. The player might not have hands or not have a weapon attack depending on the RNG, but may have other useful traits.
* Gnome – Mostly unchanged from vanilla.
* Goauld – Lacks limbs and cannot pick up items. Also doesn't have a weapon attack. However, they're very good at symbiosis and unlike other characters, specifically require non-stationary monsters for symbiosis. Monsters with weapon attacks are a good choice, because without them the goauld only has a weak 1d4 bite attack that doesn't scale at all. Pairing the goauld with a role that doesn't start with the symbiosis skill will set the symbiosis skill cap to Master.
* Golden saint – They start with intrinsic reflection. However, their stats start out low and they have a hard time gaining max HP and Pw.
* Golem – Doesn't get hungry over time (but ring hunger and similar effects still apply). They are immune to death rays, but can't eat food normally, and casting spells is harder for them.
* Green slime – A very difficult race that lacks limbs and equipment slots, among other things. Being turned into a green slime while having polymorph control will permanently change the player's race to this one.
* Gremlin – Fire resistant, their melee attack can cancel monsters at night, but if the player stands on a lit tile, HP regeneration is disabled and there's a chance of being struck by temporary blindness.
* Greuro – They're fast and will start knowing the riding, lance and polearms skills even if the chosen role normally wouldn't get them, but are limited to basic skill in bow and crossbow if the chosen role would have a higher cap.
* Grid bug – They get a lot of HP/Pw on leveling up, as well as a melee shock attack, but cannot move diagonally.
* '''Grouper''' – More likely to encounter groups of monsters, even if the monster in question normally appears solitary.
* '''Hardmoder''' - As the name suggests, hard mode; the player doesn't start with the guaranteed scrolls that every character gets, and is also less likely to find those types of scrolls (healing, mana etc.).
* '''Hallucinator''' – Gets hallucinatory messages even when not actually hallucinating.
* '''Haxor''' – Steroids mode: if the player chooses this race, monsters will respawn twice as fast, the dungeon will generally be filled with more monsters, items and traps, hit point regeneration is faster both for monsters and players, pets level up twice as fast, special dungeon features show up more often etc.
* HC alien – They always start out female, even when picking a role that would normally become male upon game start. If they become male during gameplay, they aggravate monsters. Otherwise, they are completely unable to have speed and can never have the high heels skill, and if they want to put on or take off armor, no monster may be adjacent to them or they are zapped by an angry god. Eating any quadruped as a female HC alien angers the gods too, as does consorting with foocubi. A female HC alien can't pray safely unless they have at least 2 points of luck and 20 points of alignment, and lit tiles will behave as if they were unlit for them meaning they have to be directly adjacent to see what is there.
* Hemi-doppelganger – A weaker version of the doppelganger, this race enables players to #youpoly at will but they don't get polymorph control by leveling up. On the other hand, they don't suffer from the doppelganger's lower chances of getting death drops.
* Hemophage – Difficult race that suffers from random blood loss.
* Herald – Gains random skills when obtaining a trophy but all their starting skills are capped at a lower level than what their role would usually get.
* Herbalist – A racial version of the healer role, they start with lots of items suitable for healing, plus they can use medical kits without the large chance of failure that other roles suffer from.
* '''Heretic''' – Similar to human, but they can pray and convert altars even in Gehennom. Trying to convert Moloch's high altar on the Sanctum is still a very Bad Idea though.
* Hobbit – Mostly unchanged from vanilla.
* '''Homicider''' – A gameplay-changing race for which monsters don't normally spawn, though they will still appear in special rooms, special levels and other predetermined places. Whenever the game would normally spawn a monster for a homicider player character, a random trap is created instead. This makes it much harder to level up or get food, plus death-dropped items will be more rare, but even on the occasion that they do level up, homiciders only have a 50% chance of getting a HP/Pw boost, making them very frail. It might be a good idea to look for scrolls, wands or especially spellbooks of create monster for some farming.
* Hound – Has a random breath weapon that can be used via #monster, but lacks hands.
* Hidden elf – An elf race that can hide under items.
* Human – The baseline race, so to speak; mostly unchanged from vanilla.
* Hunkajunk - Areas that would be walkable will have randomly placed walls sometimes, which makes it harder to navigate levels but may also come in handy to block off monsters.
* Hybridragon – Starts with a randomized breath attack, but is unable to be resistant to its own breath element. They fly, but lack hands making them harder to play.
* Hypothermic – Permanently frozen, which greatly slows their movement rate. Their AC is improved slightly and they're completely immune to fire, which includes being able to swim in lava, and the hypothermic's items cannot be destroyed by fire, but cold attacks deal significantly more damage to them.
* Illithid – Their brain-sucking attack will quickly kill monsters that have brains, plus illithids also start with some useful intrinsics, but they have a much lower chance of getting intrinsics from eating corpses.
* Immunizer – Effects that temporarily disable in/extrinsics don't affect them, but they randomly lose alignment record points whenever monsters are generated, making it much more risky to pray.
* Imp – Starts with fire resistance and regeneration, but also teleportitis.
* Imperial – Can pacify monsters by chatting to them, but is more likely to encounter out-of-depth monsters and cannot pray successfully no matter what.
* Incantifier – Starts with magic resistance, freeing an equipment slot for other ascension kit items, but can't eat normal food. Instead, incantifiers can only eat metallic and lithic objects.
* Incorporealoid – Has x-ray vision, flying, wallwalking and death resistance and is inediate. They don't regenerate HP naturally and don't fit through narrow passages. To regain HP, an etherealoid needs to kill a monster. Also, they're unable to wear armor, but receive an AC bonus depending on their experience level. Incorporealoids gain experience points at half the usual rate.
* Indraenian – Gets the following nasty trap effects from leveling up: dropcurse, faster monster spawning, dangerous terrains, level-dependant good effects always act as if the player was level 1, sanity timeout, wing yellow glyphs, low effects and engravings don't work.
* Inheritor – Gains random artifacts when obtaining a trophy, but some aspects of the game are harder than normal.
* Inka – Permanently dimmed, which will negatively affect their armor class. They gain extra AC when wearing inka armors, can take off inka rings/amulets without bad effects and are also otherwise better at using inka items. Also has higher than usual magic cancellation. Their starting items are replaced with inka ones where applicable, and they gain boosts to the occult spells and spirituality skills.
* Insectoid – Can summon insects, starts with poison resistance and flying, and uses a poisonous sting in melee. Their lack of hands is a huge disadvantage though. Insects are usually peaceful to them.
* Iraha – Poison resistant and can use #monster to poison the currently wielded weapon, even if the weapon type in question normally cannot be poisoned. When attacking with a poisoned weapon, the poison is less likely to wear off and it won't occur alignment penalties even when lawful. They have extra range for wands of digging. All monsters are generated hostile to the iraha and they're always banned from shops, plus they can't purchase shopkeeper's services; trying to pick up an unpaid item in a shop will immediately turn the shopkeeper hostile, with no warning.
* '''Ironman''' – Every room is made into a special room, with a few exceptions. Many of them will be filled with monsters; especially early on these might be too tough to handle, but on the bright side, certain items are much more common due to monsters in the special rooms spawning with them.
* Irritator – Permanently numbed. They have free action and shock resistance, but are more susceptible to hug attacks.
* Itaque – Cannot have speed. They get a 10% bonus to their AC, but have a permanent -1 to damage. Itaques take less damage equal to (player level)%, meaning at experience level 30 they receive 30% less damage overall. They can train skills slightly faster.
* Jabberwock – Has extra melee attacks whose power scales with the player's experience level, maxing out at XL20. However, passive monster attacks deal double damage to them. They don't fit through diagonal openings, and if a monster survives the jabberwock race player's melee attacks, it can then retaliate faster than normal.
* Japura – They take damage whenever they lose alignment, but always have knowledge of the long sword skill even if the chosen role normally wouldn't have that, and their attacks deal double damage to monsters from variants other than vanilla as well as those from other games like Diablo or Elona.
* Java – Can't have cold resistance, but resists fire, poison and sickness. They take extra damage from monsters' melee attacks, and javelin-class weapons generate in bigger stacks for them, plus the javelin skill will always be known at game start even when playing a role that would normally be restricted.
* Jelly – They can eat metal, stone and organic materials, but are blind, making them harder than hard to play.
* Khajiit – Their unarmed melee attack does extra damage.
* Klackon – Starts with confusion resistance. They lack hands, but can use an acid spit attack at range.
* Knowledgable - -2 strength, but starts with a bunch of BUC and enchantment knowledge allowing them to recognize those aspects on items more often.
* Kobold – Poison resistant, starts with some stacks of throwing weapons. They will fall asleep every so often though, which can be very bad if they stand next to Demogorgon.
* Kop – Keystone Kops are usually peaceful to them, and chatting to a peaceful K can tame them. All randomly generated monsters also have a low chance of starting out tame to a Kop character.
* Koronst – Has intrinsic water walking. They gain multishot bonuses with slings and are more likely to get permanently converted by hc converters. A koronst starts the game with a catapult (sling-class weapon) and is good at using the sling and firearms skills, but other weapon skills train more slowly.
* Kutar – They are prevented from having telepathy, warning, searching, infravision, detect monsters or half spell damage, but start with confusion resistance and keen memory. Kutar get (experience level / 10) bonus points of AC and are immune to mind flayer tentacle attacks. They're also extra stealthy, resulting in sleeping monsters being less likely to wake up, but their lack of hands makes them difficult to play. Kutar cannot start with the searching skill even when selecting a role that normally would.
* Leprechaun – Starts with uncurable and uncontrollable teleportitis, and they get increased chances of success with the #borrow command plus the ability to steal gold by attacking in melee. Leprechauns are usually peaceful to them.
* '''Levelscaler''' – Makes it so that all items have levels, and they're very unlikely to generate on levels that are shallower than the item's level. This means that the early game offers less valuable loot since most of it is replaced with low-quality items.
* Levitator – Their starting equipment includes tools to pick up items, which they need since levitators start with uncurable levitation. They also begin with telepathy and some other intrinsics, and they can use downstairs even while levitating, but they're still very hard to play.
* Lich – Lots of resistances and intrinsics, including controlled teleportitis right from the start plus a guaranteed athame means the lich will have a very easy early game. Their downside doesn't become apparent until much later in the game, where high-level monsters have a greatly increased chance of spawning. A lich character is guaranteed to be bombarded with nasty, hard-to-kill monsters in the Gehennom and on the ascension run.
* Listener – Occasionally gets messages if a highly enchanted item or an artifact is generated. However, the average enchantment on randomly generated items is lower than it is for other races.
* Lizardman – Resistant to petrification.
* Loli – Basically just a standard human with see invisible and infravision, except they have a useless #monster ability.
* Lycanthrope – The werewolf form's HP no longer sucks, and bite damage has also been made to scale with the player character's level, making this race much more playable than it was in SLASH'EM.
* Mactheist – Gains lower bonuses from speed in/extrinsics. They can see two squares in the dark, but all religious actions (i.e. those that would break the atheist conduct) don't work at all. Sling ammo has reduced odds of breaking, and a mactheist using a shield has an improved chance of blocking. They always know the riding and lance skills, and if their role starts with those, their cap is increased.
* Magyar – Starts with 1000 extra skill points, allowing them to max out all the skills. They can't exercise their attributes though, and receive bad effects for breaking the atheist conduct, which includes every time the player drops an item on an altar. Praying also additionally reduces alignment by 10 and luck by 1 before the prayer starts, meaning that even if it was seemingly safe to pray, it may still result in the gods being displeased. All skills train at half the usual rate for a magyar, but the bow skill will be known at game start if the player's role wouldn't normally have it.
* Maia – Starts with uncurable and uncontrollable teleportitis. They also cannot teleport at will, but their starting inventory contains a wand of teleportation (10 charges).
* '''Matrayser''' – At game start, each item class will have its materials shuffled, which is noticeable mostly for weapons and armor. However, the player starts with no items in their inventory. Instead, all the starting items are transferred to a bunch of huro troves, nonmoving level 0 monsters that start on random levels of the Dungeons of Doom each holding one of the items. The player has to kill them in order to get the items.
* Matrixer - at the start of the game, every skill is mapped to a random other skill, and using it will train the other skill it is mapped to, instead of the actual skill itself. This means that the player has to figure out which action trains which skill, and build their character accordingly, which can be quite difficult since there's no indication as to how each of the skills will be trained.
* Maymes – Unable to ever have the riding skill. Any worn ring, cloak or robe of protection will grant 2 extra points of AC on top of what those items normally give. While wielding a firearm, maymes characters enjoy a 20% reduction of incoming damage. If they buy protection from a temple priest, they receive double the amount of bonus AC. Casting the protection spell also gives double the amount of protection and it lasts twice as long. The firearm, bow and crossbow skills train twice as fast for a maymes.
* '''Mazewalker''' – Instead of rooms-and-corridors levels, they get nothing but mazes. The mazewalker also has a digestion melee attack that occasionally instakills monsters.
* Mazin - starts with bonuses to INT and WIS, can train spellcasting skills more quickly, but the starting cap on all the spell school skills is lower.
* Metal – Moves at 3x the regular speed, and starts with resistances to fire, cold, shock, sleep, disintegration, poison, draining, sickness, magic, acid, stoning, death rays and psi. However, metals lack hands and whenever they take damage, the damage is multiplied by d10, meaning the player is a glass cannon that may get killed very easily.
* Mimic – Using the #monster command, they can turn into a dungeon feature to make monsters forget they're there. This can allow the mimic to take a breather and regenerate.
* '''Minimalist''' – Items only have a 1 in X chance of being generated for players of this race, with X usually being something from 2 to 5, but sometimes it can be higher. The value of X is determined at game start.
* Missingno – Starts with uncurable and uncontrollable polymorphitis. They will also polymorph with a 20% chance whenever they eat food, and will transform into random glitch monsters whenever they polymorph. This might still be crashy but unless the player deactivates the "missing_safety" option it should be mostly stable. Since the glitch monsters are actually random bits of (non-monster) data being read as monster data, similar to the missingno glitch in the actual Pokemon games, they're usually very bad polymorph forms which usually have no usable attacks and a movement speed of 0. However, every once in a while the game may polymorph the player into a semi-useful glitch monster; the random number generator is set up so it has thousands of glitch monsters to randomly choose from.
* Mongung – Can't have speed in/extrinsics, and has reduced movement speed. Their intelligence and wisdom are very hard to increase. Leveling up will increase the mongung's attack speed but reduces their action speed even further. Mongungs enjoy a +3 damage and +10 to-hit bonus in melee. They can never start with the riding skill.
* Monkey – Strong but not terribly bright, a monkey's strength can never fall below 4, preventing them from being unable to cast spells. However, their effective intelligence can't go higher than 9.
* Monster – Lower skill caps, but they have two melee attacks per round, more multishot with ranged attacks and need less mana for spellcasting.
* Moon elf – An elf race whose properties depend on the phase of the moon. If it is full, they have intrinsic flying. On a new moon they are amphibious, and if the moon is waxing or waning, they have stealth.
* Mould – Starts with uncurable and uncontrollable polymorphitis. No risk of system shock or a polymorph level draining them below experience level 1 though. They have some crippling weaknesses while not polymorphed, but they can #youpoly at will.
* Mummy – Lots of resistances and intrinsics, and they can try to tame undead monsters by chatting to them. Mummies also receive some of the Necromancer's bonuses to undead-related spells like summon/command undead, which means the undead monsters are more likely to become tame.
* Mushroom – Moves at 66% normal speed, but attacking or other actions are done at regular speed. Mushrooms can #monster to switch between polearm mode and regular mode; while in polearm mode, they can apply any weapon and use it as a polearm to hit monsters standing two squares away. If this is done with a projectile (e.g. a dart), the weapon has a chance of disappearing just like it would when thrown, and a projectile that requires a launcher (e.g. an arrow) will do only very little damage. Therefore, this ability is best used with melee weapons (e.g. a two-handed sword).
* Myrkalfr – Very similar to elf.
* Naga – Starts with hungerless spellcasting. Naga are usually peaceful to them.
* '''Nastinator''' – They start with random nasty effects that cannot be cured. This can make the game much harder, depending on which effects they get.
* Navi – Does extra damage with spears, and their kick does extra damage if they wear wedge sandals (which they start with).
* Nemesis – Always has aggravate monster. They can't have flying while wearing a cloak, not see in the dark while wearing a helmet, and not have intrinsic speed while wearing boots (but extinsic speed from e.g. speed boots still works). Monsters that would usually spawn peaceful will spawn hostile. Praying has a 1 in 4 chance of simply failing, without giving a negative effect but still setting a prayer timeout. They start the game with a +7 trident and will know the skill, but all non-aquatic monsters are harder to hit with all weapons. Wielding any trident that is +0 or lower will increase its enchantment by a random value, but this can only be done once with each trident (so dulling it back to +0 and re-equipping it won't give it a random positive enchantment a second time).
* Nibelung – Counts as a dwarf for cannibalism and same-race sacrifice purposes. They resist the darkness effect that makes areas unlit, as well as the mana drain effect of the anti-magic field trap, and start with intrinsic searching.
* Nord – Cold resistant and sturdy.
* '''Null''' – A harder-than-hard race that starts with no role-specific inventory, plus they get no race-specific HP/Pw boost on leveling up.
* Nymph – Can steal items by attacking in melee, but starts out chained to a heavy iron ball. The #monster command can't be used to remove the ball, and even if the player somehow gets rid of it, a new ball will appear after a while. Also starts with teleportitis.
* Octopode – Cannot wear any armor pieces at all, but is able to eat rings with a 100% chance of getting their effects as an intrinsic.
* Ogre – Does extra damage with clubs. They aggravate monsters though. Ogres are usually peaceful to them.
* Orc – Unlike vanilla, they can now dual-wield.
* Outsider – Starts in the Space Base and has to make it at least to the bottom of the Sewer Plant before being allowed to visit other areas of the game. Outsiders start with resist acid and scent view, and will gain contamination resistance and some other intrinsics from leveling up, as well as a bunch of techniques.
* Peacemaker – Racial version of the Activistor role, they start with random intrinsics (good or bad) and have a chance per turn to lose them again. The starting extra items (including a spellbook of charm monster) can be very useful.
* Pervert – They can't have slow digestion or full nutrients. Perverts can ride all steeds at their actual speed regardless of riding skill, however they need to have sex and pray every once in a while or they get a lasting debuff that only goes away when they actually have sex/pray again; importantly this is still the case even if the player's god became angry, meaning that it's up to the player to make sure they can actually safely pray. Ranged weapons used by the pervert have their range limited to 2 squares. Steeds ridden by the pervert will deal more damage to monsters and the player is also less likely to fall off, plus the player knows the riding skill even when using a role that wouldn't normally start with it.
* Phantom – Like ghasts, these start with many intrinsics and can only eat old corpses, but unlike ghasts they aren't penalized for eating humans.
* Piece – They move faster orthogonally but slower diagonally. If the player lines up monsters such that they can be fought orthogonally, this can be used to make battles easier.
* Piercer – They can #monster to hide, and while hiding, they will regenerate HP and Pw twice as fast. However, when not currently hiding, they won't regenerate at all.
* Poisoner – For this race, all weapons are permanently poisoned, making it much easier to kill monsters that lack resistance. However, immunizers can't ever be poison resistant themselves, leaving them vulnerable to instakills.
* Polyinitor – A "polymorphitis" race, except they don't really polymorph, instead their base form is that of a monster and will change periodically. The monsters chosen that way will be ones that are in depth corresponding to the player's current depth in the dungeon, so no starting as an arch-lich (bar extreme luck). Cannot have polymorph control or unchanging.
* '''Problematic''' – A difficult race that gets random permanent nasty effects upon leveling up.
* Quantum mechanic – Has teleportitis and the speed bug.
* Race that doesn't exist – They periodically lose intrinsics, and their techniques are often put on a lengthy timeout.
* '''Race X''' (aka X-Race) – Starts with a spellbook of lightning, some frag grenades and the ability to do lightning damage in melee. For Race X characters the rne randomization routine is more likely to generate higher numbers, and thereby rnz will generate higher numbers on average too, which means that enchanted items are more likely to get generated with higher enchantments, prayer/technique timeouts will generally be longer, etc.
* '''Randomizer''' – A race that causes the player's starting equipment to be randomized; instead of the actual role-specific inventory, the player starts with the inventory of any randomly chosen role. All weapons, spellbooks and saddles generated this way will enable their respective skills if the player can't normally get them; they will start at Basic level and can always be advanced at least to Expert. This means the randomizer race is a way to reach Expert level in skills normally unavailable to a role; for example, if a Healer randomly starts with the Barbarian skill level, it's possible to use two-handed swords at Expert level, something that healers normally can't do.
* Redditor – Starts with stun resistance, but as soon as they reach XL10 they will also be permanently stunned. Thanks to the resistance this will not make them hit their pet or step into lava though.
* Redguard – Resistant to poison and sickness, and starts with energy regeneration making them very easy to play.
* Releasier - Has permanent autopilot and mojibake, and starts with different skills than what the selected role would normally get.
* Reticulan – Starts in the Space Base and has to make it at least to the bottom of the Sewer Plant before being allowed to visit other areas of the game. They have keen memory and learn psi resistance as well as manaleech from leveling up, plus their melee attack can cause inertia. However, if they are hurt, they wince, reducing their combat capabilities, and at very low health they become inverted, making their enchanted gear malfunction.
* Rodneyan – Playable Rodney mode. Rodneyans start with controlled teleportitis and can Ctrl-T to teleport at will for 30 Pw, even on no-teleport levels, and their Pw recovers much faster than usual. Also, rodneyans do extra damage with all attacks, and Rodney starts out peaceful and happily allows the player to pick up the Book of the Dead. The rodneyan starts with many spellbooks and a high chance of receiving more on leveling up. However, they also have disadvantages. Monsters respawn four times faster for rodneyans, and with a greatly increased chance of higher-level ones, too, plus they are automatically generated hostile. Rodneyans suffer from levelteleportitis that bypasses teleport control. If a rodneyan player character dies and is at least XL3, they are given the option to use "perilous life saving", which brings them back to life but drains 2 experience levels and deletes all of the player's items and spells, potentially severely crippling them.
* Rohirrim – Starts with fast speed and finds phase door scrolls more often, but always aggravates monsters. They are prevented from having stealth.
* '''Roommate''' – Places special rooms completely at random on all dungeon levels. Those rooms may be encased in solid rock, or overlap with regular existing rooms.
* '''Rougelike''' – The entire game uses rogue level graphics. Depending on whether the player sets IBMgraphics or DECgraphics, the actual graphics might look different.
* Rusmot – Starts with 5 additional skill slots, and when they unlock a new skill or increase the cap of a known one, the new cap can sometimes be higher than normal. Rusmots have worse AC than normal and their armor dulls more quickly, but gain +2 increased damage with all weapons. Quaffing booze or wine gives +100 extra nutrition.
* Salamander – Can swim in lava, but is unable to have cold resistance.
* Satre – Very good at using devices, but cannot wear suits, shirts, cloaks or boots and cannot use light sources.
* '''Scriptor''' – Much more likely to encounter script-generated monsters, which may be rather dangerous.
* Scurrier – Their main property is the ability to eat walls.
* Sea-elf – Can breathe underwater, and contact with water will not rust/blank their items. They also resist cold and are not affected by water turbulences, however sea-elves cannot be fire resistant, and fire effects are much more likely to destroy their scrolls/potions/spellbooks.
* '''Segfaulter''' – Enables both the player and monsters to spit segfault venoms, which may terminate the game with a fake error message. Not recommended.
* Senser – Similar to human, but sometimes they get a notification if a monster is spawned. The chance of getting this notification goes up as the player reaches higher experience levels.
* Serb – Slightly faster than normal, but has worse AC. They have +1 to-hit and damage and gain more nutrition when eating. Peaceful monsters have a small chance each turn to spontaneously become hostile.
* Sheep – Lacks hands, but has a sleep-inducing melee attack. At experience level 20 the sheep gains resist fire, poison and acid as well as swimming, see invisible and infravision as well as the ability to gate in tame demons when attacking monsters in melee and a greatly increased carry cap.
* Shell – Moves at half speed, but also takes only half damage.
* Shoe – Lacks limbs, but can tame shoe monsters by throwing food at them. Shoes also usually spawn peaceful for them and can be saddled and ridden even when they're not tame.
* Sinner – Resistant to confusion, but this comes at a price: their starting alignment is negative, and it will take a long time until the max alignment (which also starts out negative) will become positive again. Not only that, but sinners also receive 10x heavier penalties for performing actions that reduce alignment.
* Skeleton – Powerful in melee, because monsters need a +2 or higher enchanted weapon to hit them reliably. They also start with lots of intrinsics. However, skeleton player characters can only eat old corpses, and their to-hit is much lower, their kicks deal way less damage, their spellcasting chances are worse and ranged attacks will often misfire. Skeletons take very long to train their skills and attributes.
* Skillor – Starts with one random extra skill that can be trained, or if it's a skill that the chosen class already has, its skill cap is increased. They gain less HP and Pw from leveling up than other races.
* Snail – Extremely slow, and can only equip launchers and cloaks, but the skills for stuff they can actually use will start higher and can reach a higher cap.
* Snakeman – They can swim and wrap enemies, possibly drowning them or preventing them from moving away. Lack of feet prevents them from kicking. Snakes are usually peaceful to them.
* '''Sokosolver''' – This race gets Sokoban levels instead of regular dungeon levels, and the Sokoban rules apply everywhere. So, breaking boulders or other forms of cheating will cause luck penalties.
* '''Soviet''' – A gameplay-altering race that makes many parts of the game behave like SlashTHEM, and also renames most items to Russian names. Characters of this race suffer from lower speed.
* Spammer – Has to read more faux messages.
* Spard – Gets +4 multishot with all ranged weapons but also takes 25% more damage, and damage reduction from negative AC is less effective at reducing incoming damage. They can still pray safely with -10 alignment and -1 luck, as long as none of those values is more negative than that. Enchant armor/weapon effects increase a spard's item enchantment by more than they normally would, but spards may sometimes not see traps even when triggering them.
* '''Specialist''' – For this race, all normal dungeon levels are replaced with special levels.
* Spiderman – They are poison resistant and can poison monsters. Spiders are usually peaceful to them.
* Spirit – Lots of resistances and intrinsics, including the very powerful phasing while in their natural form makes this a useful race; however, they always move quite a bit slower than other characters.
* Spriggan – Can't be fire resistant, but they start with regeneration, speed, as well as half physical/spell damage. However, spriggans have a much harder time increasing their max HP.
* Stabilisator - Permanently surrounded by an anti-teleport shell, which prevents both the character and all monsters from teleporting.
* '''Stairseeker''' – Staircases and magic portals are placed much more randomly for them, which mainly means that they don't always generate in a room when the level has rooms, but can also occur in corridors.
* Sticker – Can prevent monsters from fleeing by attacking them in melee and is good at using wands, but needs to wield them before they can be zapped.
* '''Stunned-like-a-fish''' - Effects that paralyze the player use rnz instead of rnd for the paralysis duration, which can result in the paralysis lasting unusually long.
* Sustainer – Starts with intrinsic nonremovable sustain ability, and since the player's starting stats usually aren't great, this is generally a bad thing. However, it will prevent mind flayer instadeaths.
* '''Suxxor''' – A harder-than-hard race that starts with -13 luck and no way to improve it. The standard monster spawn rate is halved for this race.
* Swikni – Starts with high stats and is very good at using knives, which can reach higher skill levels and gain bigger bonuses, plus the knife is more likely to land a critical hit on an enemy. The swikni is penalized for using eroded equipment. If they step on a square that has at least 10 items on it, they suffer from bad effects. Even peaceful monsters occasionally take a swing at the player.
* Sylph – They eventually gain permanent detect monsters from leveling up, but their HP and Pw regenerate at half the usual rate, plus they can't have regeneration or energy regeneration. Sylphs are supposed to be vegetarian, losing alignment if they eat meat.
* Tayiin - Physically frail, but deals more damage when kicking and is skilled at martial arts; the skill is available even if the chosen role wouldn't get it normally. They learn several melee-oriented techniques.
* '''Techless''' – Difficult mode. Doesn't learn any techniques from leveling up, doesn't start with any, and also otherwise can't ever obtain techniques.
* Thunderlord – Starts with flying and fire resistance, but always aggravates monsters and is prevented from having stealth. They don't fit through diagonal passages.
* Tonberry – Unable to have confusion resistance, and also move slightly slower. Tonberries lack hands and suffer from higher spellcasting penalties but gain a bunch of techniques from leveling up and will know the axe and knife skills even when the chosen role normally wouldn't.
* Trainer – Can train skills more quickly, but needs much longer to train stats.
* Transformer – Starts with uncurable and uncontrollable polymorphitis, however they will not experience the negative effect of polymorph forms without limbs or otherwise handicapped ones. So a Transformer can wield weapons, put on a splint mail or kick a locked door etc. even when polymorphed into e.g. a lichen. They don't drop or break their equipment on polymorphing either. Still, especially the early game is very dangerous for a Transformer since unlike other polymorphitis races, they have no protection from system shock or bad polymorphs.
* Trapper – Traps on the current dungeon level are sometimes revealed for them. However, they get struck with random nasty trap effects every so often.
* Troll – They get very little HP and mana boosts from leveling up, but start out with sickness resistance and regeneration. A trollor has a 75% chance of auto-reviving on death if they're at least XL 3, which makes them a great choice for beginner players, however this particular form of life saving also drains two experience levels so the player needs to be careful to not die again.
* Tumblrer – Perma-stunned, a.k.a. harder than hard mode, but all of their skills start out already maxed, so weapons will deal lots of extra damage and have good to-hit, while spells will probably have 0% fail rate.
* Turmene – Extra multishot with firearms, and they can make shotgun shells with the create ammo technique. Turmenes always start with knowledge of the firearms skill even if the chosen role would normally be restricted, but they suffer from a -2 damage penalty when attacking in melee.
* Turtle – A defensively solid race that gets a level-dependant AC boost, plus they can use the monk's martial arts techniques meaning they will possibly be very strong in combination with a role that usually fights bare-handed (e.g. pokemon or politician). However, turtle characters move much more slowly than other races, allowing monsters to get extra turns.
* Umber hulk – Lacks hands and a weapon attack, so even if the player manages to equip a weapon, its damage will be meaningless for melee attacks. They can chew through solid rock and have intrinsic confusion resistance, but are also moving slightly slower.
* Unalignment thing – This race gets feedback whenever their alignment record changes in any way, plus their max alignment record increases four times faster and they get extra melee attacks, but the lack of limbs and inability to pick up items makes them a very difficult way of playing the game.
* '''Unbalancor''' – Difficult race that can't ever have magic cancellation at all.
* '''Undefined''' – Their starting inventory is a lot more random.
* Ungenomold – Starts with uncurable and uncontrollable polymorphitis, instantly polymorphs into a random monster upon starting the game, and permanently dies (as opposed to reverting back to ungenomoldic form) upon running out of hit points with no chance of life saving. No risk of system shock or feeling like a new ungenomold, and their polymorphs can't time out either. They can use #youpoly at will. Also starts with warning, searching and lots of techniques as well as a wand of death.
* Unicorn – They're very fast, and can #monster to cure status effects as often as they want and #jump at will. But they can only eat stone, and all monsters will also be faster than usual; also, prayer can randomly fail.
* Unmagic – Starts with the magic missile spell, but can't ever have magic resistance.
* Urian – Gets the following nasty trap effects from leveling up: bigscript, turn limitation, timerun, can't train skills, monster noises, sanity treble, permacurse and covetousness.
* Vamgoyle – A vampiric race that can also eat normal food, but lacks most of the vampire's intrinsics.
* Vampire – Mostly unchanged from vanilla, but when sucking blood in melee the player now gets a y/n confirmation. If declining, the monster still loses a level.
* Veela – If the showdmg option is on, a veela always gets feedback telling them how much damage they do to monsters. Also, humans (everything represented by @) are usually peaceful to them, and they always recognize the BUC status of all items. However, the veela always has to follow the knight's code of conduct; every time they break it, they are hit by a random bad effect.
* Venture capitalist – They start with a large supply of gold, and randomly spawned gold is sometimes generated in much larger quantities. However, for a venture capitalist all shopkeepers start out hostile and will actively seek the player to attack; paying them 1000 zorkmids will usually calm them and allow the player to use the shop normally.
* Vietis – Can sometimes reuse firearm ammo, but weapons that aren't firearms have greatly reduced to-hit and spells are generally harder to cast. If their armor blocks an enemy's attack, it may occasionally enchant itself by one point up to a maximum of +7. The vietis is less likely to wake up sleeping monsters, but poison is more likely to affect them, has a greatly increased chance of instakilling the player, and may still instakill the player even with poison resistance; the instakill is prevented only if the player has double poison resistance. Vietises can backstab fleeing monsters.
* Viking – +1 damage bonus but also takes 25% more damage. Items in their inventory have a level-dependant chance of resisting water damage.
* Vortex – Starts with a big load of useful intrinsics including flying, unbreathing and some resistances, plus the otherwise unobtainable "unsolid warning" and "limbless warning" abilities. They can also #chat to any vortex to tame it, and vortices are usually generated peaceful, plus vortex characters learn quite some powerful techniques from leveling up. However, their big disadvantage is that they're permanently blinded, so they either need to polymorph into a form that has eyes or use the search command a lot.
* '''Warper''' – Starts with uncurable and uncontrollable polymorphitis. They are protected from system shock and instadeath by being drained below experience level 1, and they can #youpoly at will; every time they polymorph, they will polymorph into any random monster, including ones that are no valid polymorph forms. This means the warper may randomly polymorph into a Demogorgon, Famine, Master Kaen, Wizard of Yendor or other very powerful being, but their polymorph duration is halved and since they can't control it (putting on an amulet of unchanging doesn't work either), they should try to make the most of any polymorph form they get. A warper can also eat corpses for a 20% chance of polymorphing into the eaten monster, and every monster can leave a corpse, so it's possible to e.g. kill the Wizard of Yendor and temporarily become him by eating his corpse. While in their natural form, warper characters also have teleportitis and a teleporting melee attack. Random rooms-and-corridors levels are more chaotic for a warper, sometimes generating rooms inside each other, and on entering a new level there's a sizable chance of a tension spawn that fills the level with themed monsters. To top it off, enemy spellcasters will cast spells twice as often for a warper character.
* '''Wind inhabitant''' – Difficult race that starts with intrinsic nasty effects, which periodically get swapped out for other nasty effects.
* Wisp – Can #monster to breathe lightning, #sit to lay eggs, and gets lots of mana from leveling up, but has difficulties eqiupping weapons and armor.
* Wookie – Starts with the lightsaber skill and all lightsaber forms at a higher cap, but the caps for all other skills are lower.
* Worm that walks – Starts with uncurable and uncontrollable polymorphitis. They are protected from system shock and instadeath by being drained below experience level 1, but unlike moulds and ungenomolds, they cannot #youpoly at will. Instead, the worm that walks has to eat corpses to polymorph into the eaten monster, so if they e.g. kill a black dragon, eating its corpse will polymorph them into a black dragon. There is always a 20% risk of polymorphing into some other random monster, and eating non-corpse food also has a 20% chance of causing a random polymorph. A worm that walks has no hands while not polymorphed, making it much harder to interact with certain dungeon features, but in their natural form they can hide under items which will cause monsters to wander randomly instead of approaching.
* Wraith – They start with a ton of intrinsics and get big boosts to their AC from leveling up, plus they start with the passwall spell and most undead monsters are usually peaceful to them, however wraiths permanently lose maximum HP whenever they equip any weapon or armor.
* Xorn – Can only eat metal and is able to walk through walls. They cannot wear body armor.
* Yeek – Starts with all skills at unskilled (except those that their role doesn't get, which are obviously restricted), even for the starting inventory items. They gain very few hit points and mana upon leveling up, but will level up twice as fast.
* Yokuda – A variant of the redguard race, with fire resistance added on top of sickness and poison resistance as well as higher starting stats but less HP growth per level.
* Yugger – Starts with 15 extra skill points. They don't get positive intrinsics from leveling up and no role-specific techniques. All starting skills that would be capped higher than expert will be capped at expert, but all skills that would start out restricted will be capped at basic.
* Yuki-onna – They take a little extra damage whenever something damages them, but have extra melee power.
* Zruty – Has a bunch of weak claw attacks in melee in addition to a regular weapon attack, and a couple techniques.