This page is meant to display all the new options and hotkeys (including extended commands) that are specific to SLASH'EM Extended, so that players are aware of their existence.

== Options ==

* bash_reminder - default TRUE, can be set in-game. If it's on, bashing with a launcher, polearm or unlit lightsaber will periodically remind the player that they're not using their weapon effectively, and clumsily throwing arrows or other projectiles without the corresponding launcher will do the same. Can be turned off if the player finds the messages annoying, at the risk of not realizing that one is doing scratch damage.
* death_explore - default TRUE, can be set in-game. Not available on public servers. If it's on, dying under circumstances where the player doesn't leave a bones file gives a prompt whether they want to continue in explore mode, as an alternative to closing the game.
* eatingconfirm - default FALSE, can be set in-game. If it's on, eating non-food items (e.g. as a metallivore) will give a confirmation prompt to reduce the risk of accidentally eating one's main weapon or other important items.
* eatingwalls - default TRUE, can be set in-game. If it's on, a player character in a form that can eat walls (e.g. rock mole) will try to eat walls by moving into them. Turning the option off will stop that from happening and instead give the standard "There is a wall in the way!" message.
* gmmessage - default TRUE, can be set in-game. If it's on, messages sent in GM mode to create monsters will disclose which monster was spawned.
* graffitihilite - default TRUE, can be set in-game. If it's on, tiles with engravings will be highlighted cyan. Can be turned off if the player finds it annoying.
* knapsacklimit - default FALSE, can be set in-game. If it's on, the player's inventory cannot take more than 52 items, although loadstones and certain other bad items will still be able to bypass the limit.
* materialglyph - default FALSE, can be set in-game. If it's on, items will be prefixed with an abbreviation for their material type, at the cost of making item strings longer; this can result in item names not actually fitting on the screen but is often helpful as the player can see more quickly what material an item is made from.
* memorizationknown - default FALSE, can be set in-game. If it's on, it cuts the verbose messages related to the memorization skill. Players who fully understand how the memorization skill works may want to turn this option on to get rid of the message spam, but new players should leave the option off.
* missing_safety - default TRUE, can be set in-game. It used to control whether the playable missingno race could crash the game, but that was changed so that the missingno race never crashes regardless of what this option is set to.
* moreforced - default TRUE, can be set in-game. If it's on, many messages give a --More-- prompt by default. Players who get annoyed by that can turn the option off and use MSGTYPE to configure their own --More-- prompts instead.
* numpadmessage - default TRUE, can be set in-game. If it's on, and the player tries an invalid command during the first 50 turns, a message about turning the number pad on or off will be displayed up to five times; this is mainly for new players who don't know how to switch between number pad and vikeys. If you already set your options file to the desired input mode and/or know how to switch between the two, add OPTIONS=nonumpadmessage to your options file to turn this message off once and for all.
* paranoidquit - default TRUE, can be set in-game. '''Highly dangerous to turn off.''' If it's on, using the #quit command requires a full "yes" confirmation; turning it off means that hitting y ends the game, which can easily cost you a promising run if you meant to save instead (which already has a single 'y' confirmation).
* pickup_cursed - default FALSE, can be set in-game. If it's on and you also have pickup_thrown on, you'll pick up known cursed thrown items by moving over them (otherwise your character will leave them on the ground, which lets you throw loadstones without the danger of accidentally picking them up automatically).
* pokedex - default TRUE, can be set in-game. If it's on, farlooking a monster will show additional information.
* showmc - default FALSE, can be set in-game. If it's on, the bottom status line will show your current magic cancellation. This can cause the status line to become too big and get cut off or disappear; to circumvent that problem, use a terminal with size of exactly 80x25 (or 125x45 when playing bigslex) and then turning this option on shouldn't cause any problems.
* showmovement - default FALSE, can be set in-game. If it's on, the bottom status line will show your current movement rate (before modifiers like freezing or speed boots come into play). This can cause the status line to become too big and get cut off or disappear; to circumvent that problem, use a terminal with size of exactly 80x25 (or 125x45 when playing bigslex) and then turning this option on shouldn't cause any problems.
* showlongstats - default FALSE, can be set in-game. If it's on, the bottom status line will write out strings instead of abbreviating them, e.g. "Elb" becomes "Elbereth" and "Blk" becomes "Blackmarket". This can cause the status line to become too big and get cut off or disappear; to circumvent that problem, use a terminal with size of exactly 80x25 (or 125x45 when playing bigslex) and then turning this option on shouldn't cause any problems.
* showsanity - default FALSE, can be set in-game. If it's on, the bottom status line will display your character's current sanity. This can cause the status line to become too big and get cut off or disappear; to circumvent that problem, use a terminal with size of exactly 80x25 (or 125x45 when playing bigslex) and then turning this option on shouldn't cause any problems.
* tabcursesconfirm - default FALSE, can be set in-game. If it's on and you're playing with the curses interface, --More-- prompts become -Tab- confirmations.
* tech_description - default TRUE, can be set in-game. If it's on, choosing a technique from the menu prints a description and then asks whether you really want to use it. Turning it off gets rid of both the description and the prompt, making it behave like it does in SLASH'EM.
* wallglyph - default TRUE, can be set in-game. If it's on, solid rock is displayed with the # glyph. Turning it off means that solid rock is just a blank tile, which is not recommended but some players seem to prefer it.

* askforalias - default FALSE, has to be set in the options file. If it's on, starting a new character allows the player to assign a name, which is especially useful on public servers that would otherwise force the character's name to always be the same as the username.

== Hotkeys and extended commands ==

* Ctrl-U or #removeimarkers - Removes all gray I markers (which represent unseen monsters) from the current dungeon level. This prevents the player from losing a turn when moving into a marker after the monster has already moved away, or needing to prefix their movement with m in order to not lose a turn (which can result in not automatically picking up items from that square or other undesirable effects). If the nasty trap effect is active where every keypress adds a new faux I marker to the current dungeon level, playing the game without knowing of the existence of this command can be very frustrating.
* #mark - Marks an item as undroppable for pets. It only affects that particular item, not all items of the same base type. You can then drop the item on the ground and hope that the pet picks it up. Beware: if you have several pets, you need to make sure that the correct one picks up the item, because once it's been picked up by the pet, it won't be dropped again no matter what (unless the pet dies)! This can be useful for equipping a pet with items that it would use situationally, such as wands of polymorph (used only if the pet is low on health or low-level) or ranged weapons (used only if the pet is hit by a monster's ranged attack, as pets aren't coded to offensively fire ranged weapons at other monsters).
